A Mirror Made of Feathers: How Our Relationship to Chickens Tells Us More about Us than Them



A Mirror Made of Feathers
Chickens are not usually considered to be the center of very serious topics. This idea is especially true if that very topic is meant to be about someone's spiritual beliefs or ideals. Depending on where you live, you might think of chickens as just domesticated meat and egg sources, or an annoyance commonly found all around, maybe even as a source of entertainment. These are all examples of physical connotations we have for chickens. There aren't, of course, just physical connotations associated with chickens, but also more emotional connotations too. Throughout thousands of years of human advancements chickens have been known to be gentle, powerful, dangerous, fearful, fearless, tender (in multiple ways), honorable, mischievous creatures. The list goes on, but how can there be so many emotional and physical connections associated with chickens? Where do these associations stem from? Are people simply projecting their emotions onto chickens? The natural conclusion here is that chickens are obviously mirrors into humanity's souls! This statement is false, but in this paper I hope to give you the information needed to better understand people's complex relationship with chickens, so we can better understand ourselves. To be more clear, I am here to answer the all important question: what ideals can we learn about cultures, religions, and ultimately ourselves by comparing our values and actions to our beliefs or use of chickens?
To help answer this potentially loaded question, I will provide a brief history surrounding the topic in this paragraph. According to Origin and History of the Chicken by Division of Extension (2024), the Southeast Asian Red Junglefowl is one of the earliest known ancestors of the modern domesticated chicken, with domestication probably occurring around 7,000 to 10,000 years ago (Division of Extension, 2024). After the domestication of Red Junglefowl people would bring chickens everywhere they went. According to The Hawaiian Chicken History and Origin, by Feather Lover Farms (2023, January 18) a family-run rare chicken hatchery, explains that the undomesticated chicken was introduced to Hawaiian lands in the years 400 AD to 800 AD. The chicken was brought all over the place, to small islands in Asia, towns in China, and eventually the Amaricas (Feather Lover Farms, 2023, January 18). In this paper I will be going into depth about the ideals of a few religions and groups of people. I believe that to answer my question thoroughly I must first show the correlation between the beliefs of people and what they thought of their chickens. 
The chicken has had many uses throughout history. Two interesting cases of chickens being used are by the town in Xichuan County, China in addition to many traditions of Hawaiian people in the past. The Chinese town, according to Breeding History and Candidate Genes Responsible for Black Skin of Xichuan Black-Bone Chicken, sourced and written up by Li and a group of other RNA researchers (2020), used and bred Black-bone chickens as they "are commonly believed to have medicinal properties and have been used as remedies to enhance the human immune system" (Li et al., 2020). The source then goes on to say that in the area "transportation and trade were restricted, local resources were used for medical treatments" (Li et al., 2020). This source is a great explanation for how the Xichuan chicken came to be, as the Xichuan people needed to use their local resources, chickens in this case, for medicine. In The Hawaiian Chicken History and Origin it is explained that chickens "were considered a symbol of resilience and adaptation, and were often used in traditional Hawaiian ceremonies and rituals" (Feather Lover Farms, 2023, January 18). The Hawaiian people used chickens in ceremonies because they stood for resilience and adaptation. On the one hand, Hawaiian traditions used chickens for ceremonies while on the other hand, Xichuan used chickens for medical needs. Chickens were used in different ways due to the unique needs or beliefs of the people handling them. Therefore, it is also true to say that the chickens were morphed into what the people of the Xichuan town and Hawaiian tribes needed. The chickens of Xichuan were selectively bred for medicine and formed an all black pigment because of the townspeople; This trait in the chicken gave Xichuan a name for itself. The chickens in Hawaii, while retaining no special trait from their uses, were instead used for specialized equipment for ceremonies, with some of the equipment still around today. Both sets of chickens and people left a footprint on one another - or claw mark - by enhancing and shaping the practices they were used in. All of this information is to say that chickens have had important uses that helped reflect people's needs and wants.        	
Throughout history it wasn't just how people used the chicken that gave chickens meaning to people, but also political aspects that chickens happened to be a part of too! In the paper The Chicken in Andean History and Myth: The Quechua Concept of Wallpa, written by Seligmann (1987), a knowledgeable Sociology and Anthropology writer that has worked in the Andean region of Latin America for over forty years, goes into detail about the Quechua concept of "wallpa", which means chicken. It addresses the chicken's role in Andean history, and its significance. The passage explains the arrival of the chicken during the Spanish Conquest and how it led to a new perception of power and authority for the Quechua, as well as how it became intertwined with their indigenous myths and history (Seligmann, 1987, page 139 - 140). During the Spanish conquest the Quechua saw the Spanish as mighty and powerful, as they were weak in comparison. We can infer this idea because when the Spanish introduced the chicken to the Quechua they thought the same of the chickens, mighty and powerful. This idea worked its way into the stories and myths of the Quechua people, leading to many of their myths about powerful beings also including chickens. Similarly, in the article Joint Resolution to Provide for Annexing the Hawaiian Islands to the United States, a source created by the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration (2022), full of collected information from throughout American history, goes into great depth on the Queen of Hawaii during the annexation of Hawaii, saying, “Queen Liliuokalani and her fellow citizens successfully protested the annexation by petitioning Congress” (U.S. National Archives and Records Administration, 2022). Queen Lili'uokalani was able to get hundreds of signatures against the annexation of Hawaii and even though these protests would eventually fail, Queen Lili'uokalani and her people were resilient. During the annexation of Hawaii, Queen Lili'uokalani protested and struggled for native Hawaiian citizens to get proper statehood. The source Queen Lili'uokalani, another United States national data filled resource created by the National Park Service (2022) for their celebration of women's history month, dives even further into Queen Lili'uokalani life, stating, “Lili‘uokalani continued to advocate for Hawaiian sovereignty and cultural retention for the rest of her life” (National Park Service, 2022). Even after Hawaii was annexed by America, Lili'uokalani continued to help preserve Hawaii's culture up until her death in 1917. In Kauai’s Wild Chickens: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly!, a broadcast journalist with extensive knowledge of online media, shares some history on the introduction of domesticated chickens to Hawaii and that "Most locals agree that wild chickens proliferated after Hurricane Iniki ripped across Kauai in 1992, destroying chicken coops and releasing domesticated hens” (Bauman, 2016, September 27). With the domesticated chickens being set free onto the islands, even after nearly 80 plus years since the struggles of Queen Lili'uokalani, the Hawaiian people saw the chickens as something similar to the past queen. The Hawaiian people saw a species struggling to survive, a group of adaptive and clever animals, with as much resilience as they had possessed themselves. The chickens were domesticated and in no state to fend for themselves in an unfamiliar environment, but just as the Hawaiian people endured hardships so many years ago, so did these chickens. The Quechua and the Hawaiian people had gone through political turmoil with their cultures at stake of being destroyed. While the Quechua saw the strength of the Spanish, Hawaiian citizens further saw the resilience that they held. Domesticated chickens were introduced to both cultures by an opposing political power and both cultures saw the chicken in a different light. The chickens hadn't even done anything very different in either situation, they were simply brought to these different places. Both cultures imbued their personal experiences and trials of political turmoil onto chickens with their idealized or utilized values.
Cultures are unique in many ways, with more values than feathers on a chicken. A fascinating culture of people in my opinion are the Dayak people. In Kuna, updated by Tikkanen, an informed individual whose work undergoes a rigorous review process involving a 14-point checklist, talks about the Dayak people as a group of scattered river tribes with the majority of the people being animists and practicing the religion of Kaharingan, a type of Hinduism. The article continues to talk about how the people normally live in longhouses with their kids until they leave in search of a husband or wife in another village. Normally these houses will also be shared with different families from their village. One of the now no longer practiced pastimes of the Dayak people is headhunting. It was a sport where they would basically find and hunt somebody for their head. The important part of this information is that it is no longer practiced because it was causing too much tension between the Dayak people (Tikkanen, 2009, June 8). My take on this information is that the Dayak consist of people wishing to be closer with one another since they are separated by the rivers and hills they call home. The Dayak were even willing to get rid of old traditions to purge themselves of any tensions they held for one another. We can find a similar hope, for the connection of people, formed around the Dayak’s beliefs in chickens. In Cultural References to Chickens it is stated that “Kaharingan, an animist folk religion of the Iban branch of the Dayak people, includes the belief in a deity associated with the rooster and cockfighting, and the belief that humans become the fighting cocks of god” (Wikimedia Foundation, 2024). The Dayak people of Kaharingan faith believe that humans will become the fighting cocks of god, or the army of god, once they are deceased. The Dayak people will often compare chickens to a gathering of people. Just as many cultures do, the Dayak people have chickens fight one another for entertainment. Why do the Dayak believe that chicken fights bring about a communal camaraderie when other people might look at this activity as a gruesome or mighty feat for the chicken? The Dayak people want to be close with one another, so when they see a chicken fight the main aspect of the event that they focus on is not the brutality of the chickens, but rather the coming together of people. Just as an army or festive event might bring many people of different ideas together, so does the chicken. Just as the Dayak people are scattered and part of like minded, but unique tribes, they hope to be closer with one another. The culture of people is reflected and refracted through chickens, as we look for the qualities that we may lack or hope for in them.
Even in myths, stories that people take to heart, or were originally referred to as being true, there are great examples of people intertwining their thoughts with chickens. For example, from the short folk story Blue Hen’s Chicks, a story used by Schlosser (2022, August 28), a graduate of both Houghton College and the Institute of Children's Literature, retells the story about some chickens from Delaware, the tale exclaims, “Well, these cocks could fight! They were so fierce, they caused quite a stir among the men. It did not take long for the Delaware troops to begin boasting among the troops from the other states that they could out-fight anyone, just like those famous fighting cocks” (Schlosser, 2022, August 28). A few things are happening in just these two sentences. The Delaware troops had thought of themselves as better than others and the chickens, in the troops eyes, were the best fighters around. It was only natural that the troops took to comparing themselves to those chickens as the things they saw the chickens do were the very same ideals that they had for themselves. McCall (1978), an expert of Yoruba Art and Myth, wrote The Marvelous Chicken and Its Companion in Yoruba Art and Myth where it explores the ideas around a statue of a woman holding a chicken, explaining, “It is argued that this figure represents the Greek goddess Oduduwa with her epiphany, the cosmic chicken” (McCall, 1978, page 134). The main point of the paper is explaining the mythological aspect of Yoruba Art surrounding the chicken. The article compares the Yoruba art to the kind and nurturing goddess, that the statue is most likely based off of, to the chicken being held. The chicken is basically a representation of the nurturing goddess it is based on. With both tales there are chickens being depicted as having the ideal characteristics the people admired about themselves or others. The first folktale, a more recent story, highlights the skills the chickens had, while the second myth, a much older story with different ideologies from the last, points out the tender qualities of chickens. In both stories the qualities the people wanted to take on were the same qualities that they had mirrored onto the chickens.
Chickens are commonly associated with serious topics even if we do not realize it; especially when it comes to our spiritual beliefs or ideals. No matter where you live, chickens have lived there too. Even with you not mentally thinking about it you have probably projected some type of belief onto chickens, such as people being nurturing like a mother hen, or cowardly like a chicken. These projections of ideals and thoughts have happened throughout all of time and history! People have thought of the chicken as being: resilient and adaptive to any situation; a medical substitute to common medicine; able to endure any hardship; mighty like warriors; an example of being close with one another; and even as being skillful or nurturing beings. There are a variety of emotional and physical connotations people have associated with chickens all stemming from our actions, beliefs, and ideals. Throughout my research I have come to explore the idea that people are not just mindlessly thinking of chickens as just chickens, but instead are looking into themselves, maybe even a part of themselves that they might not even realize is there, and relating their experiences combined with the history they share with their culture onto chickens. To say that a chicken is a mirror into our souls may be a bit much, but to say that a chicken can represent or reflect back some of our most important thoughts is not. The way people interact, use, share stories, and struggle with chickens has been seen all the way from ancient Yoruba to modern America. Cultures have shared dozens of experiences with chickens and we have stacked each and every one of those experiences onto them. By looking through the layers of ideas and values that we have piled onto chickens we can not only learn about them, but in doing so also learn about ourselves. Just as a culture of people may aspire to be stronger in the face of conflict, closer with one another, demonstrate superiority over those around them, exhibit a kinder and more nurturing side of themselves, and even express resilience against the world, so do chickens, or at least that's how many have chosen to view chickens. We should deepen our learning of chickens because it would deepen our knowledge of ourselves. By looking back and learning about chickens and their place in our history we can discover and identify our own personal beliefs about the world around us, and perhaps even learn a lesson on who we want to be.  